Biography: 
Rosalind W. Picard is founder and director of the Affective Computing Research Group at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media Laboratory and is co-director of the Things 
That Think Consortium , the largest industrial sponsorship organization at the lab. She holds 
a Bachelors in Electrical Engineering with highest honors from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
 and Masters and Doctorate degrees, both in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). She has been a member of the faculty at the MIT
 Media Laboratory since 1991, with tenure since 1998. Prior to completing her doctorate at MIT,
 she was a Member of the Technical Staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories where she designed VLSI chips 
for digital signal processing and developed new methods of image compression and analysis. 

The author of over a hundred peer-reviewed scientific articles in multidimensional signal modeling,
 computer vision, pattern recognition, machine learning, and human-computer interaction, 
Picard is known internationally for pioneering research in affective computing and, prior to that,
for pioneering research in content-based image and video retrieval. She is recipient (with Tom Minka) 
of a best paper prize for work on machine learning with multiple models (1998) and is recipient 
(with Barry Kort and Rob Reilly) of a "best theory paper" prize for their work on affect in human 
learning (2001). Her award-winning book, Affective Computing, (MIT Press, 1997) lays the groundwork
 for giving machines the skills of emotional intelligence. She and her students have designed and
 developed a variety of new sensors, algorithms, and systems for sensing, recognizing, and responding 
respectfully to human affective information, with applications in human and machine learning, health,
 and human-computer interaction. 

Dr. Picard has served on many science and engineering program committees, editorial boards, and review
 panels, and is presently serving on the Editorial Board of User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction:
 The Journal of Personalization Research, as well as on the advisory boards for the National Science
 Foundation's division of Computers in Science and Engineering (CISE) and for the Georgia Tech College 
of Computing. 

Picard works closely with industry, and has consulted with companies such as Apple, AT&T, BT, HP,
 i.Robot, and Motorola. She has delivered keynote presentations or invited plenary talks at over
 fifty science or technology events, and distinguished lectures and colloquia at dozens of universities 
and research labs internationally. Her group's work has been featured in national and international forums
 for the general public, such as The New York Times, The London Independent, Scientific American Frontiers, 
NPR's Tech Nation and The Connection, ABC's Nightline and World News Tonight with Peter Jennings, Time,
 Vogue, Voice of America Radio, New Scientist, and BBC's "The Works" and "The Big Byte." Picard lives in 
Newton, Massachusetts with her husband and three energetic sons. 


